well meanwhile gaza's Health Ministry
has declared a polio epidemic across the
strip the World Health Organization
announced on Friday it would be sending
a million polio vaccines to Gaza after
the highly infectious disease was
discovered in sewage samples there
humanitarian agencies have been
expressing concerns over an outbreak due
to the deteriorating sanitary conditions
and the lack of Access to Health Care
well let's get more on this with hin
kodari she joins me now on the line from
deral Bala in central Gaza hind as we
were saying earlier we've been hearing
These Warnings for months now this is a
highly contagious disease that had
broadly been eradicated from most parts
of the world talk us through how bad
this could get in
Gaza well it all started with hepatitis
A Hepatitis B
diseases um weird stuff on people's
skins without knowing what these are now
they discovered a highly infectious
disease in seage samples and later on
they noticed that this was virus CV V2
in waste water especially in those areas
in and in the middle area and why in
those areas because the Israeli forces
have been asking all the Palestinians to
evacuate from Rafa from different areas
from the Northern areas to the middle
middle area Palestinians have been
living in the streets Mak naked camps
without having access to bathroom
without having any hygiene without
having easy access to Water Sanitation
sewage is everywhere garbage is piled in
streets and this is the least of what
health officials are saying they're
saying that this is only a start of a
wave of new diseases now the the
minister of house was unable to track
any of those cases and why is because
they do not even have the equipment or
the tools or the lab supplies to record
those cases and even if one someone was
affected with this they won't even have
the ability to treat uh such cases now
since ra incursion started and the
Israeli started um taking over the
Philadelphia Corridor there has been no
medical supplies entering the go there
has been no medicines entering and it's
making the health situation collapse
every single day now according to health
officials they're not only treating uh
people who are injured from Israeli air
strikes but they're also treating
Palestinians with htis a htis b and
there's an out outbreak of skin diseases
among children especially those who are
living intent this is only the start
according to the officials but the the
ongoing uh garbage pile the suwage
people across the streets shattered
across the streets not even having
access to bathrooms is the main reason
of why this uh uh disease and this uh
virus is um is across Gaza and both of
the doctors said that this is only the S
of the waves of diseases the Gaza Sur is
going to
face hind Kari there with the latest for
us reporting from darl Bala in central
Gaza thank you
hind Margaret Harris she's the
spokesperson for the World Health
Organization she joins me now from
Geneva Margaret for more than 25 years I
believe the Gaza Strip was polio free
then just last week polio was detected
in in six out of seven routine sewage
samples I mean we know in war scenarios
it creates the environment for polio to
spread but where did it come
from so basically it comes from
somebody's gut uh that's what the sewage
samples tell us that at least quite a
few people because those samples were
from hunis and from Dera Bala and it was
six of seven as you've correctly
reported so that means that probably
more than one person now does have the
virus in their gut and that also tells
us that we need to urgently be able to
get in there and vaccinate all the
children and provide the level of
services the level of care that was the
norm in Gaza before this this conflict
Margaret so there are different strains
of polio I understand this particular
strain that's been found is vaccine
derived polio can you explain that for
us what and what that might potentially
mean for spread to
too so it's actually a variant that's
developed it originally a long time ago
was vaccine derived but it's managed to
get into populations and turn into a
variant just as we saw with covid there
are many variants and we have tracked
this variant in different parts of the
world and again wherever we see it pop
off we do a big vaccination um response
to and that usually shuts it down so
that's again why the was water
surveillance is so so important but in
this circumstance and again we've got a
clear way to respond to get the
vaccination in there but we have to have
the the end of we have to have the
security we have to have the means of
getting the vaccine into Gaza and to the
children a vaccine's no good if it's
sitting in a vial or sitting in a truck
so uh there is an answer but the answer
is we need a ceasefire
well let me ask you in the event that
there isn't a ceasefire you're saying
that you are going to try to roll out 1
million vaccines what is your plan for
Access and if this is this vaccine
derived polio strain are there
implications for what type of vaccine
can be
used oh yes we we know what type of
vaccine will work the oral po polio
vaccine works very well because
essentially this is a virus that gets
into the gut goes in comes out the other
end that's why Wastewater is a very
important way to detect it so putting an
oral um vaccine in does the job but as
you say the critical thing is being able
to reach all the children now we're
going to make every effort to do that
because we continue to provide that
service through the partners through all
the health workers in Gaza who haven't
stopped working as you know they've done
their very best but just getting around
the strip just getting to all the
children just bringing the children
safely to where they can be vaccinated
is almost impossible unless we're given
at least a pause in the fighting to do
what needs to be done Margaret I
understand there has been some
vaccination taking place during the
course of this war and there has been
some collaboration with the Israeli
authorities to ensure that that happens
I was looking at some of the numbers
before the war polio vaccination
coverage in Gaza was well over 95% last
year it was
89% those sound like fairly High numbers
yet we are seeing this now how bad could
this get given the the pre-war
immunity so indeed you're right in fact
Gaza was a model it was one of the best
in the region um shining example of what
could be achieved because there was such
good Primary Health Care because there
had been a lot of work to really build
that up a network of good Primary Health
Care Services but you know if you I've
often spoken with uh the the the nurses
and doctors who run those Primary Care
Health Centers like the rest of the
population they've had to pick up their
things and run so many times so they're
there and they have continued to
vaccinate whenever possible but again
we've remember we're now into the 10th
month of this conflict so that's a whole
generation of babies that have been born
you know pregnancy is 10 months nine
months 10 months and they many of them
have not had the opportunity to be
vaccinated so it's not just hold know
it's all the other things that protect
our children from the diarrhea Ro
diseases the other diseases that in the
past killed children we need to be able
to provide that protection of course
Margaret so far it seems that the cases
have been mild and asymptomatic we
haven't been hearing about paralysis for
instance in the cases of polio how
quickly could that
change so most polio 75% of polio May
well be a symptomatic it's it's like
many viruses the problem is if you are
one of those who get the severe form you
can be paralyzed for life or you can die
so that's why it's such an important
disease and we were at on the point of
eliminating it the other thing about
polio is it's a disease it just stays in
the human population so with vaccination
we could have eliminated it from the
world but with the conflicts breaking
out around the world all that work all
those millions of dollars all all those
millions and billions of men and woman
hours have been wasted because we've
just gone backwards so indeed you're
right um and at the moment I mean you
the outbreak we're looking at is an
outbreak we understand from the
Wastewater surveillance which tells us
that the virus is there but we at this
at present we have not had a case of
acute paralysis reported to the World
Health
Organization Margaret Harris there the
spokesperson for the World Health
Organization speaking to us there from
Geneva thank you so much for your time
Margaret and we wish you all the best
with the vaccine roll
out thank you so much for hosting
me make sure to subscribe to our channel
to get the latest news from Al jazer